---
layout: post
title: "pgd: An R package"
date: 2021-04-10
---
I just released on my GitHub account the first package in **R** (as far as I know) focused on the [**Proper Generalized Decomposition**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proper_generalized_decomposition)! I've unsurprisingly called it `pgd` and can be found [here](https://github.com/quesadagranja/pgd "here"). At the moment it only solves boundary value problems based on the **2D Poisson's equation** in Cartesian coordinates. Depending on its "success", I can consider extending it with other differential equations.

## Introduction
The package implements the methodology developed in the article [*A new family of solvers for some classes of multidimensional partial differential equations encountered in kinetic theory modeling of complex fluids*](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01004909/document), by Ammar et al., which was the first paper to describe the PGD (although without naming it as such). This package numerically solves two-dimensional Poisson's equations in Cartesian coordinates, that is, equations of the type

$$
\Delta T(x,y) = - f(x,y)
$$

or, equivalently,

$$
\left( \frac{\partial^2}{\partial x^2} + \frac{\partial^2}{\partial y^2} \right) T(x,y) = -f(x,y)\text{,}
$$

where $T$ is a scalar function of $(x,y)$.

The problem is defined in the rectangular domain

$$
(x,y) \in \Omega = \left(-L_x, +L_x\right) \times \left(-L_y, +L_y \right)
$$

with homogeneous (vanishing) boundary conditions.

The PGD iterative algorithm will seek the solution of the problem in the separate form

$$
T(x,y)= \sum^{\infty}_{j=1} \alpha_j \, F_j(x) \, G_j(y) \text{,}
$$

where functions $F_j(x)$ and $G_j(y)$ are the $j$-th separate components (or *modes*, in the PGD jargon) of the solution. Since the *modes* come in the form of normalized vectors, a coefficient $\alpha_j$ is required to provide the right solution. The number of *modes* generated by the PGD iterative algorithm cannot be known beforehand, but can be controlled by the user.

Due to the separate nature of PGD, the function $f(x,y)$ must also be provided in a separate form.

## Installation
The installation of the ``pgd`` package in your favorite R environment is really easy and can be done in three steps. First, install the ``devtools`` package if you don't have it. To do so, type:

{% highlight r %}
install.packages("devtools")
{% endhighlight %}

Then, install the ``pgd`` package from my repo:

{% highlight r %}
library(devtools)
install_github("quesadagranja/pgd")
{% endhighlight %}

Finally, load the package:

{% highlight r %}
install.packages("pgd")
{% endhighlight %}

That's it!

## Using the package
The package only contains the function ``pgd::poisson_2D()``, which solves the 2D Poisson's equation using PGD. The function has six input arguments, of which two are optional.

The mandatory arguments are:
* The source function ``src``, defined by $f(x,y)$.
* The number of nodes ``n`` to discretize the domain $\Omega$.
* The nodes ``bc`` of the (vanishing) boundary conditions.
* The limits of the mesh ``mlim`` described by $-L_x$, $+L_x$, $-L_y$, $+L_y$.

Since all these arguments are specified for variables $x$ and $y$, lists of the type ``list(x=, y=)`` must be used.

The optional arguments have to do with the conditions of the iterative PGD algorithms:
* The maximum number of iterations ``maxiter``, which must be specified as a list for both the outer loop ``f_iter`` and the inner loop ``r_iter``. The values by default are 500 for ``f_iter`` and 250 for ``r_iter``.
* The error tolerance ``tol``. The outer iteration of the PGD algorithm will stop when the ratio between the last and the first calculated $\alpha$ coefficients is less than this value. The value by default is $10^{-4}$.

The output that the function returns is a list of four components:
* The list of matrices ``f`` with the resulting modes for variables $x$ and $y$.
* The vector ``alpha`` of coefficients.
* The list of coordinates ``coor`` for variables $x$ and $y$.
* The resulting surface ``t``.

Some examples of use are detailed below.

## Examples
The examples shown here are extracted from the paper mentioned in the *Introduction* section by [Ammar et al](https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01004909/document).

#### Example #1
The first example computes the solution of the 2D Poisson's problem defined in $\Omega = \left(-1, 1\right) \times \left(-1, 1\right)$, with $f(x,y) = \cos(2 \pi x) \sin(2 \pi y)$, assuming that the solution vanishes at the domain boundary. The code to obtain the solution with the ``pgd`` package is below.

{% highlight r %}
# Source example
src <- list(
  x = function(x) list(cos(2*pi*x)),
  y = function(y) list(sin(2*pi*y))
)
# Number of nodes
n <- list(
  x = 41,
  y = 41
)
# Mesh limits
mlim <- list(
  x = c(-1, 1),
  y = c(-1, 1)
)
# CALL FUNCTION
o <- pgd::poisson_2D(src, n, mlim)
{% endhighlight %}

A grid of $41 \times 41$ nodes has been defined. The solution is reached in one iteration (the value of $\alpha_2$ is so low that can perfectly be neglected) and is stored in the list ``o``. The $x$ and $y$ modes can be represented by typing

#### Example #2
$$
f(x,y) = x^2 - y^2
$$

{% highlight r %} 
src <- list(
  x = function(x) list(x^2, 1),
  y = function(y) list(1, -y^2)
)
{% endhighlight %}

#### Example #3
$$
f(x,y) = 2x^2 + x + y^2 - 0.2y + 3xy
$$

{% highlight r %} 
src <- list(
  x = function(x) list(2*x^2, x, 1, 1, 3*x),
  y = function(y) list(1, 1, y^2, -0.2*y, y)
)
{% endhighlight %}